Caelum

Caelum /  s i l m / is a faint constellation in the southern sky, introduced in the 1750s by Nicolas Louis de Lacaille and counted among the 88 modern constellations. Its name means  chisel  in Latin, and it was formerly known as Caelum Scalptorium ( the engravers chisel ); It is a rare word, unrelated to the far more common Latin caelum, meaning sky, heaven, atmosphere.  It is the eighth-smallest constellation, and subtends a solid angle of around 0.038 steradians, just less than that of Corona Australis .

Due to its small size and location away from the plane of the Milky Way, Caelum is a rather barren constellation, with few objects of interest. The constellation's brightest star, Alpha Caeli, is only of magnitude 4.45, and only one other star, (Gamma)  1 Caeli, is brighter than magnitude 5.  notable objects in Caelum are RRCaeli, a binary star with one known planet approximately 20.13 parsecs (65.7ly) away; XCaeli, a Delta Scuti variable that forms an optical double with  1 Caeli; and HE0450-2958, a Seyfert galaxy that at first appeared as just a jet, with no host galaxy visible.

History


Caelum was first introduced in the eighteenth century by Nicolas Louis de Lacaille, a French astronomer who introduced thirteen other southern constellations at the same time.  Lacaille gave the constellation the French name Burin, which was originally Latinized to Caelum Scalptorium ( The Engravers Chisel ).

Francis Baily shortened this name to Caelum, as suggested by John Herschel. In Lacaille's original chart, the constellation was shown both as a burin and an choppe, although it has come to be recognized simply as a chisel.  Johann Elert Bode stated the name as plural with a singular possessor, Caela Scalptoris  in German ( die ) Grabstichel ( the Engravers Chisels )  but this did not stick.  

Characteristics


Caelum is bordered by Dorado and Pictor to the south, Horologium and Eridanus to the east, Lepus to the north, and Columba to the west. Covering only 125 square degrees, it ranks 81st of the 88 modern constellations in size. It appears prominently in the southern sky during the Southern Hemisphere's summer, and the whole constellation is visible for at least part of the year to observers south of latitude 41N. [a] Its main asterism consists of four stars, and twenty stars in total are brighter than magnitude6.5. 

The constellations boundaries, as set by Eugne Delporte in 1930, are defined by a 12-sided polygon. In the equatorial coordinate system, the right ascension coordinates of these borders lie between 04 h 19.5 m and 05 h 05.1 m, while the declination coordinates are between 27.02 and 48.74.  The International Astronomical Union (IAU) adopted the three-letter abbreviation Cae for the constellation in 1922. 

Notable features


Caelum is a faint constellation: It has no star brighter than magnitude 4 and only two stars brighter than magnitude5.

Lacaille gave six stars Bayer designations, labeling them Alpha (  ) to Zeta (  ) in 1756, but omitted Epsilon (  ) and designated two adjacent stars as Gamma (  ). Bode extended the designations to Rho (  ) for other stars, but most of these have fallen out of use.  Caelum is too far south for any of its stars to bear Flamsteed designations. [b]

The brightest star, (Alpha)  Caeli, is a double star, containing an F-type main-sequence star of magnitude4.45 and a red dwarf of magnitude12.5, 20.17 parsecs (65.8ly) from Earth.   (Beta)  Caeli, another F-type star of magnitude5.05, is further away, being located 28.67 parsecs (93.5ly) from Earth. Unlike ,  Caeli is a subgiant star, slightly evolved from the main sequence.  (Delta)  Caeli, also of magnitude5.05, is a B-type subgiant and is much farther from Earth, at 216 parsecs (700ly). 

(Gamma)  1 Caeli is a double-star with a red giant primary of magnitude4.58 and a secondary of magnitude8.1. The primary is 55.59 parsecs (181.3ly) from Earth. The two components are difficult to resolve with small amateur telescopes because of their difference in visual magnitude and their close separation.  This star system forms an optical double with the unrelated XCaeli (previously named  2 Caeli), a Delta Scuti variable located 98.33 parsecs (320.7ly) from Earth.  These are a class of short-period (six hours at most) pulsating stars that have been used as standard candles and as subjects to study astroseismology. XCaeli itself is also a binary star, specifically a contact binary, meaning that the stars are so close that they share envelopes. The only other variable star in Caelum visible to the naked eye is RVCaeli, a pulsating red giant of spectral type M1III,  which varies between magnitudes6.44 and 6.56. 

Three other stars in Caelum are still occasionally referred to by their Bayer designations, although they are only on the edge of naked-eye visibility. (Nu)  Caeli  is another double star, containing a white giant of magnitude6.07  and a star of magnitude10.66, with unknown spectral type.  The system is approximately 52.55 parsecs (171.4ly) away.  (Lambda)  Caeli, at magnitude6.24, is much redder and farther away, being a red giant around 227 parsecs (740ly) from Earth.  (Zeta)  Caeli is even fainter, being only of magnitude6.36. This star, located 132 parsecs (430ly) away, is a K-type subgiant of spectral type K1.  The other twelve naked-eye stars in Caelum are not referred to by Bode's Bayer designations anymore, including RVCaeli.

One of the nearest stars in Caelum is the eclipsing binary star RRCaeli, at a distance of 20.13 parsecs (65.7ly).  This star system consists of a dim red dwarf and a white dwarf. Despite its closeness to the Earth, the system's apparent magnitude is only 14.40  due to the faintness of its components, and thus it cannot be easily seen with amateur equipment. In 2012, the system was found to contain a giant planet, and there is evidence for a second substellar body.  The system is a post-common-envelope binary and is losing angular momentum over time, which will eventually cause mass transfer from the red dwarf to the white dwarf. In approximately 920 billion years, this will cause the system to become a cataclysmic variable. 

Due to its small size and location away from the plane of the Milky Way, Caelum is rather devoid of deep-sky objects, and contains no Messier objects. The only deep-sky object in Caelum to receive much attention is HE0450-2958, an unusual Seyfert galaxy. Originally, the jet's host galaxy proved elusive to find, and this jet appeared to be emanating from nothing.  Although it has been suggested that the object is an ejected supermassive black hole, the host is now agreed to be a small galaxy that is difficult to see due to light from the jet and a nearby starburst galaxy. 










Coordinates : 05 h 00 m 00 s, 40 00 00